Today is Thursday June the 23rd. My name is Jill Willie and I'm here today speaking with
Roy Evans at his home in Ryder, home with an absolutely beautiful view. Well Roy, thanks
very much for agreeing to talk to me. First of all, can we start by just asking your year
of birth please?
1948.
Right, that's fine. Okay, now you've lived and worked in Ryder all your life. Can you
start off with your early life, where you were born?
I was the first child to be born in Cai Glass when they were elected them as they were finishing
them. So I was born there in 1948 with my brothers, you know, and we had a happy time there. And
the whole row, there's loads of us children up there and we had some great fun like, isn't
it? Yeah.
Were you able to play in the streets then? Was it safe to play on the road?
Oh yes, there's, outside our house in Cai Glass we lived in number three. There was
a lamppost there and there was another one up by my uncle in number 11 Cai Glass. And
we found out in the winter, if we hit the lamppost with a big stone, we'd knock the
light off so we could play hide and seek. And then every Saturday morning, Mr Williams,
who worked for the electricity board, would be coming up with his ladder to go up to put
the timer back on the clock or the lights. And we'd do the same thing again.
And did he ever catch on?
No, no, I don't think so, no. When we were very young, one of the highlights Saturday
morning, Mr Williams, they'd come up, the bread men, two brothers in red at the time,
he'd come up with his horse and cart with the bread. And the bread, he had a canvas
sheet on the back of the trailer and the bread was piping hot and mum always had a round
loaf with rings on it. So we'd take that in straight for mum and she'd cut the crust
off both ends, put butter on it for my brother and myself. That was one of the treats on
the Saturday.
That was your reward for delivering the bread?
Yes, yes.
Wonderful.
And then do we add another man come up, Bimmy I think, the milkman, he used to come up a
glass with his milk flukes again, horse and cart. I can remember them, days well.
Things have certainly changed.
Oh, they have, yeah.
You wouldn't expect to see that sort of delivery anymore.
What other families lived in Kiglass near you?
Number one was, her first husband died, so there were Joneses and Carraddocks then, and
there was a family of ten between the two, two families. And then number two there was
Missy Sharp when I was younger. We were number three. And number four was Mr. Watkins, Margaret
Watkins, she was in the Beauty Queen contest and her father worked for the council and
he was one of them. He used to go round with a bit of a truck with two bins on to sweep
the roads. And then next to him there was Jill Williams, his home, Quentin Davis, and
he was a character. And the next one then to him was Tom Jones, Dai Jones is Auntie's
father, we call him Dai Spanner, and they had a sister as well. And the next lot to
him was Eddie Futcher and he was a character. Because he didn't carry glass at the time.
We had massive gardens at the back because the road by the British Leeds, it was only
enough for one car, so you can imagine how big the gardens were. And Eddie was no gardener,
so the council wrote to him to tell him to tidy his garden up. And he replied back to
him in the letter and said, when I applied for a council house, I expected a council
house, not a homestead. Which was just like him. The next lot to him was the Bowenzes,
they were a very big family again. There was a big family of eight or nine there. And
then I don't know, there was another one, Bacchie Kinsley, he worked on the post but
he did cobbling as well. He had a little shop down there opposite the bay. And who was the
next one? Oh it was the next one was Jane Arborer's house, she lived there with her
And then there was my uncle Bill was number 11, he was a bit of a character. And then
number 12 was the Murphy's. And I always remember when we were a lot younger, we used to call
other boys here at Green Gardens, and some of that were boys, they used to call them
the Bay Boys because they always went drinking in the bay. And you'll be guaranteed Saturday
night they start at number 12 and jump the hedges. And my father had a big privet hedge
with a peak on it. And in the morning a big big dense in it and the Bay Boys called it
Beeches Brook because nobody made it. So you know we had a lot of, we made our own fun
up there then, like isn't it? Not damaged nothing but just good fun, you'll have your
gates taken off the hinges and things like that. So we had a happy childhood there.
Well he certainly did, we could almost write a book about Kiglass itself couldn't we?
Oh yes. Yes. Oh wonderful. And then school days Roy, which schools did you go to in this
town? Cuntida School, the other side there, but then Mrs Lloyd was headmistress and we
had to recite Cuntida, we used to say C W M D A U D D W R Cuntida. And my wife said
why couldn't you learn something like that even when you were in school all the time?
And after that Raider School. That was a good time there, like isn't there? A wonderful
headmaster, I can't think what his name was now. Mr Price. Mr Price, he was a good headmaster.
And then we went to the big school, Secondary Modern, which we thought was massive. We
had a lot of fun up there but I think the most that was in the school was ninety odd
then, you know we had a lot of fun and farm children came, most of them come to Brindale
School. We used to call the ones who went to Landrinders Grammar School county cabbage.
Alright. And what are your memories of Bryn Tyrion? Did you enjoy sport there Roy? Oh
yes I loved sport, yeah it was good, good all round really, like I enjoyed it up there.
Were you in the football team? Yes I played for Radisher Schools, Wynn Lloyd and myself
and Pinchy, yeah. We hardly won a game. Taking part that counts. And your school subjects
then, did you have any favourites? I quite like maths, I hope that's a spell in, I still
am a bit like isn't it, you know. My wife always says she thinks I was a little bit
dyslectic the way I used to pronounce things. She said of course today they pick it up,
you know. No we had happy times eh. I didn't like being in the choir. Friday was choir
day or gardening so we all went gardening instead of being in the choir. And where did
you do the gardening Roy? Well they did start up, they used to be up where Ainsley Richards
lives now, up behind there. They started to dig some of the ground up. Now that I know
a bit about gardening nothing grew there much because there was trees everywhere and it
took everything out of the soil. And when we were in the garden digging it we used to
find bullets because the army were billeted up there during the war and they used to go
practising in the field behind. They were all dads most of them like isn't they. So
did you have a lot of time trying to find all these bullet holes? No it's just that
when we were digging the garden and we were picking them up like isn't it. Of course
we didn't know if they were alive or dead then like isn't it. And another time we started
to be, it seems dull today but on a Friday afternoon we used to go up to where the car
park is now, that was part of the big old house then before it was pulled down. And
we started to dig down and clear the old cellar out which was there with stones and
we were tipping them in the wood because we were going to make a swimming pool there.
So we were all up there every Friday for an hour for a long time doing it. And once we
dug it out after they built the one that was in the school then, the local people collected
the money for it. So they filled the cellar up after. And I think that was my training
for being in the building site lifting the stones up. Very good start. Good transition
from school into the building trade. So could we talk a little bit about that now, how it
all started and where you worked in building trade. It was in the Red area wasn't it?
I started my time with Bernard Lloyd. In those days in school we didn't have what you call
a careers officer coming round much. My father said to me one day when I was ready to leave
school, I got you a job he said, he doesn't want any carpet but he could do with a mason
and that was my starting life. So he'd asked Bernard Lloyd, so I started with Bernard then.
We never went to college then. Bernard said if you go to college you'll swallow the union
book. It can teach you more on site which you could like you know. And when I started
I was mixing cement because I was told how can you tell a labourer how to mix cement
if you can't do it yourself. That was the upbringing you know. And as I said King Morgan
was very good to me and Dick Mitten was very good. And the Carpenter's were very good,
they were very skilled carpenters. John Lloyd, Bill Johnson and of course Derek Cadwallagh,
Ralph Oakley they were all good tradesmen then. And Bernard Lloyd now, did he have his
own building firm? Because I think he took on a lot of apprentices. Yeah Bernard he was
the main builder in town here. The only other builder at the time was Tom Morgan and Tom
only had his brother Idris and two other boys but Bernard had the majority. I think there
was 20 working for Bernard when I started. And where did you work? I believe you mentioned
the Therrow estate. We used to go up there patching the barns up round town putting slates
and rows all manner of little jobs like wasn't it you know. You'd be pushing it up a street
with a wheelbarrow or a truck with a ladder on. And my friend Dick was telling me one
day, Dick I learnt my apprenticeship with, the bloke laboring for him then was called
Evan, this was Jill Williams' grandfather. And Dick would say we'd be pushing the wheelbarrow
up by the police station pitch. And he used to say to Dick, take over, this was half past
seven quarter to eight in the morning, take over Yonge. And he said, so Dick could get
the wheelbarrow to go on, Evan would go in behind the back of the Coombe tither arms
coming out wiping his face and he said, that feels better. He'd been in for a pint that
time of the morning. And when they were never without a good bucket because in those days
the ashes were put in buckets put outside the houses because they were hot. If we had
a hole in our bucket they'd tip the ashes into the bucket with a hole and take the good
bucket. They had it all worked out by the sounds of things, my word. And you've been
in the building trade all your working life then? Yes, yes. Of particular interest is
the bread oven I believe, Dick Mitten of whom you've been speaking, told you a little bit
about this and how to construct one. Could you give me any info on that? I haven't built
the bread oven myself but I think Dick might have done one and he was telling me what they
used to do. He said, I think you had roughly a two foot diameter hole, ring I should say,
and then you put a brick upright which is nine inches and then a brick on top which
made it 13 inches and you go round like that and build the bread oven door in. And when
that's set you filled it all up with sand and you mounted the top like an oval shape
and then you bricked over the top of it and when that's set it was all done in line more
to them but the joints were very very tight because they didn't want the fire to break
it up. And once that's set you open the bread oven door and pull the sand out so it was
still formed all then as a little place like in there. They used to put all the all the
bracken and sticks in the fire, get it all warm and then pull it out so the fire bricks
were warm and then you can just push the bread in. And would these be used in commercial
bakeries or? No, mostly in old farm houses, things like that. Where my brother lives now,
I did some work up there, repaired some work and there was a massive bread oven up there
that was a very big one and that did the baking for the estate for the whole area. And where is
that? That's up in Llandinan. And I think we did some work years and years ago for Elwyn at the
Lyon Hotel. Elwyn asked Dick was there a do you think there's a fire grate, an old-fashioned fire
grate? And Dick said well yes, he said if it's an eight foot opening and about that four foot
return it's surely a big grate. So Elwyn and William, they had I don't know how many tonnes
of stone out from there and we we did it up the oak beam and all but in the corner if I
I haven't been in there for years now in the corner there's a baking oven and I'm sure that's one is
dead out of stone and you don't often see a baked bread oven dead out of stone but see the lion is
that old I suppose he didn't have fire bricks in them days you know so I'm gonna go one day into
the lion to see was I right was it a stone one I think back of my mind it was like you know.
Can you tell me exactly where the lion is in in Raerder Roy? It's
um
great opposite Crompton's Pet Shop either lay and royal with a big arch you go in on the back
it's a very old hotel yeah yeah a very old hotel I believe well to your credit Roy you built a very
beautiful home here with the most wonderful view um how long did it take you to build your your house
all told it took me four years I did so much up to the winter that I left it and then it was um
Saturday and Sunday till dinner and so I did it that way so it paid off and it certainly has and
you really have got a lovely what annoyed me after I spent four years building it and because it's
the value of it has gone up I'm penalized with council tax because I've I've gone up a band
you know they don't take into account how hard you worked to do a job like I said you know. All
credit to your expertise but um it's gone against you a bit there but never mind you still you've
still got this this lovely view all right well look thank thank you very very much Roy it's been
the most interesting talk it really has. Do you want to see a photograph of the peak?
Have you seen them? Oh before we finish yes we'd better talk about the peak hadn't we and um your
contribution to the new peak yes I'd like to see the photograph but could you tell us a bit about
the well the peak it was all done just mounds of stone where people have been climbing up it and
it kept falling down and David Evans David Lloyd who was the mayor of course David's passed away
many years ago they did a mayor's project and he approached Dick about rebuilding it and Dick was
the main man behind it all and a gang of men went up a couple of days before and pulled it down
and Dick made a template to build the peak he had one of these uprights he used to have on the
old big H television aerials and he fixed a piece of hardwood on the top about two foot six
diameter or two foot diameter the top made loads of holes in it and he went up two days before fixed
it up cemented in this place then we put string then through these holes all the way down to shape
the radius of and tapered of the actual stonework so all we have to do then is follow the lines to
go on up and I think there's about 20 the three of us doing the building Dick Mitten Les Farme
and myself and there's about 20 people up this Sunday mixing the cement and we thought we'd be
back in town before the pub shut on a Sunday at two o'clock they used to and we ran out of cement
so we were late coming down and the pubs were shut and you were looking forward to a drink
and there was a time capsule built in there and and when was this what year roughly was this
oh what decade perhaps I think I was 27 now and I'll get if I get your photograph the date is on it
all right yes that that that would be lovely yes super super
well thank you for getting the photographs Roy we've established now of course that
it was 1977 the um I suppose that'll be the Queen's silver jubilee am I right yeah
yeah there's a television pipe the pipe at the top of the peak and then we had this thing going
round and we put lines all the way down we just had to keep following it round and round and round
till we got to the top all right so that's how how you built it yes and the um the peak as we call it
of course that's a very prominent landmark yes um on the top of guastedin are I correct yes the
mountain overlooking and there's a lovely photograph here of all the local people
mainly farmers who were involved in that can in in that construction absolutely lovely um
now you you mentioned your father that he'd worked on the corporation up in the the eland valley not
far from here uh can can you tell me what he did and one special garment that you kept from him
well he worked he ended up a general foreman up there but they worked on the filter beds and
and there was about 40 in their gang then like they used to filter the water from one bed to
the other and so on but today it's left goes all the way down the pipes to to Birmingham now to
Franklin like isn't it but in the end days the water was clean when it left here but because
there were so many seepages into the pipe track it had to be filtered the other end so they
they more or less did away with a lot of it up there then he was up there for many years
yeah I see and he was originally from where Roy Pantador he was born and then he came down
to live in raider then rest of your life Pantador being a little village about three or four months
away is that correct yes on the way to family advice oh I see now I believe you contributed
something rather important to Carrod the donkey jacket could you could you tell us a little bit
about that well they were issued with these white coats we called them donkey jackets why I don't
know they could uh it was part of the issue for work and um it was a very funny the backs of them
sort of came in oval shape and on a wet day the blokes used to pin it up so it acted instead of
the water and drip it off down your legs it acted like a little truffet they turn it up and put a
pin in it so so the water would drop off the back of their coats better like isn't there very good
design yeah and then there was a some of the olden says that there was a helicopter something going
on in Valley and a fella said what's all the other all them sheep down on the hill and they said oh
it's in shape as Birmingham Corporation workers because they were real white they were these coats
so I I was in my garage for years it was sentimental value so I give to Carrod because
I wouldn't want it like isn't it yeah well at least people can see it and have a glimpse into how
people were yes well right what changes have you seen in red particularly with regard to the way
industry has gone I know there's quite a few in industry that's come and gone in this in the estate
isn't there yes well when I was I can remember the factory at Brunavon factory my sister and my
brother worked there for a while they were making sun visors for the car industry then that closed
and then Ray Hicks very play to me started compact that autumn of years wasn't it and then
they were taken over they had two shifts down there people from Birmingham came to work here
then and there was about 50 odd people working there apparently and then we had priest jacksons
that was a big outfit again and then we had uh what did they make um right priest bolts and
things like that you know and was that down on the brim berth yes yeah industry it's uh far um
it's next to radar rbs now but it it's like a um oh food place now I know we got two but
that's rbs it philip pew added and it was like farm food and stuff to start with yeah
and then the other side the brook they weren't there then when we were small
what we called the glass factory but that's still there but it didn't operating like it used to you
know the thing that things have changed yes perhaps attitudes have had as well and you
were mentioning something about the motto that um was it dick mitten said or king all king morgan
he said to me his advice he gave to you yeah when i started the first week at work he said
roi three things to remember on the building site life limb and property and always think of the
man coming behind you what he meant by that is do your work tidy so it's right for the carpenter
and stuff after but today they've come and gone those days are gone it's number one now look after
number one but he was he was very very good that's a very wise words i'm sure which probably stuck
with you yeah oh it always stuck with you all your life yeah yes yes and he is a character he
always told me to um he i said he came out one day he was always drinking a lot of water
and i remember him telling me don't you drink much water water i said not a great deal okay boy
well look here he said what you do when you go to the toilet he well you go do what you want and
he flushed flush the toilet and he said that's what i drink water for it's my way of flushing me out
and they should all do it he said again more wise words yes yes and i mean they're going back 50
years now and i used to think well what is he on about well when you think back he was quite right
you know absolutely yes we make a big thing of that now don't we not being high dehydrated
fine so on the whole you've had a very happy life really very interesting oh yes i would never go
from raider never no but we're saying like the likes of emras and them fellas like we were always
called if you're born and bred in raider he was a boogie boy because that's that's where you've been
born but now there's not many of us left now brian poor old brian lauras always used to say there's
not many of us boogie boys left now who were born and bred here you know some people have been here
perhaps for five or six years but it's not the same as being born here that's right and the boogie
why why why do you call it the boogie well it starts up by brinterian school doesn't it the
boogie i think yeah and somebody brian used to say if you if you padlo went in the boogie you're here
for life or something he used to say because that used to go all the way through town didn't it you
know am i right in thinking they they put it underground but it's still there somewhere it's
at the opposite the lodge in brinterian school it's been piped up but there was a pond there
and that's where it started it went across the road down the brook by dr evan says and then
where you go into my scene and there was another big pool on the side of the road there
then they went down north street west street and then down to the river and it's all piped after
so it goes into the river wide as it river wide eventually yes yeah so they tell us all like
but we can't see any of it now we take it no no no the the pond by the up by brinterian like
we used to go there you see frog spawns and stuff and all that that in there but
it's all it's hardly anything there now because it's been piped
hmm well one of the changes are rarer but the the legacy lives on where we people
yeah that's right yeah well i think we've covered most things now haven't we but i'm so glad i've
seen these lovely pictures and you were showing me some of school as well which brings back a lot
of memories for you yeah yes lovely right well thank you thank you very much for your time and
i i hope it's a help well absolutely yes any of these memories of bygone days certainly are when
they're dealing with them and there's always a link isn't there somehow with the eland valley
it's yeah another thing we used to do when we were young we used to go up to the station catch the
train and go as far as martick to go whimpering that was a big thing we'd be all up in the hill
picking whimperies yeah then the railway of course is no more no it's a shame really
yeah so martick which direction would that be in that up the lingering road
yeah yeah am i right in thinking that sometimes people used to sell the whimperies they'd pick to
the people on the trains yeah used to go and pick whimperies come back to town there yeah
we'd be up there all afternoon picking whimperies yeah
yeah it's very sad to see the railway go and it'd be a godsend to david or still there wouldn't it
i would think yes you never know see what happens in the future yeah yeah
all right well thank you thank you very very much roy thank you for your time thank you